[Docs] Discover docs updates (#198423)
elastic/kibana: docs/discover/get-started-discover.asciidoc

. For a more complex search, try:
+
```ts
geoip.country_iso_code : US and products.taxless_price >= 75
```

[[filter-in-discover]]
Whereas the query defines the set of documents you are interested in,
filters enable you to zero in on subsets of those documents.
You can filter results to include or exclude specific fields, filter for a value in a range,
and more.

For example, exclude results from the ecommerce sample data view where day of week is not Wednesday:

. Click image:images/add-icon.png[Add icon] next to the query bar.
. In the *Add filter* pop-up, set the field to *day_of_week*, the operator to *is not*,
and the value to *Wednesday*.
+
[role="screenshot"]
image:images/discover-add-filter.png[Add filter dialog in Discover]

. Click **Add filter**.
. Continue your exploration by adding more filters.
. To remove a filter, click the close icon (x) next to its name in the filter bar.

[float]
==== Search and filter using ES|QL

You can use **Discover** with the Elasticsearch Query Language, ES|QL. When using ES|QL,
you don't have to select a data view. It's your query that determines the data to explore and display in Discover.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

You can switch to the ES|QL mode of Discover from the application top bar.

Note that in ES|QL mode, the **Documents** tab is named **Results**.

```

. To view documents that occurred before or after the event you are looking at, select
**View surrounding documents**.

[float]
[[search-in-discover]]
=== Search and filter data

[float]
==== Default mode: Search and filter using KQL

One of the unique capabilities of **Discover** is the ability to combine
free text search with filtering based on structured data.
To search all fields, enter a simple string in the query bar.

[role="screenshot"]
image:images/discover-search-field.png[Search field in Discover]

To search particular fields and
build more complex queries, use the <<kuery-query,Kibana Query language>>.
As you type, KQL prompts you with the fields you can search and the operators
you can use to build a structured query.

For example, search the ecommerce sample data for documents where the country matches US:

. Enter `g`, and then select *geoip.country_iso_code*.
. Select *:* for equals, and *US* for the value, and then click the refresh button or press the Enter key.
. For a more complex search, try:
+
```ts
geoip.country_iso_code : US and products.taxless_price >= 75
```

[[filter-in-discover]]

> With the query field, you can filter data using the KQL or Lucene languages. You can also use the **Add filter** function available next to the query field to build your filters manually or edit them as Query DSL.

Author: ```suggestion
With the query input, you can filter data using the KQL or Lucene languages. You can also use the **Add filter** function available next to the query input to build your filters one by one or define them as Query DSL.
```

[float]
[[alert-from-Discover]]
=== Generate alerts

From *Discover*, you can create a rule to periodically
check when data goes above or below a certain threshold within a given time interval.

. Ensure that your data view,
query, and filters fetch the data for which you want an alert.
. In the application menu bar, click *Alerts > Create search threshold rule*.
+
The *Create rule* form is pre-filled with the latest query sent to {es}.
. <<rule-type-es-query, Configure your query>> and <<action-types, select a connector type>>.

. Click *Save*.

For more about this and other rules provided in {alert-features}, go to <<alerting-getting-started>>.

[float]
=== What’s next?

* <<discover-search-for-relevance, Search for relevance>>.

* <<document-explorer, Configure the chart and document table>> to better meet your needs.

[float]
=== Troubleshooting

This section references common questions and issues encountered when using Discover.
Also check the following blog post: {blog-ref}troubleshooting-guide-common-issues-kibana-discover-load[Learn how to resolve common issues with Discover.]

**Some fields show as empty while they should not be, why is that?**

> This can happen with runtime fields and regular keyword fields when the string exceeds the value set for the {ref}/ignore-above.html[ignore_above] setting used when indexing the data into {es}.

Author: ```suggestion
This can happen in several cases:

* With runtime fields and regular keyword fields when the string exceeds the value set for the {ref}/ignore-above.html[ignore_above] setting used when indexing the data into {es}.
* With nested fields, you must add the fields with the `nested` type to the table instead of its sub fields.
```
@jughosta this would now show as an itemized list. Would that be correct?

Reviewer: Not sure about "must" and "subfields" usage here. @davismcphee How would you phrase it?

Reviewer 2: Hmm I'd probably go for something along these lines: "Due to the structure of nested fields, a leaf field added to the table as a column will not contain values in any of its cells. Instead, add the root field as a column to view a JSON representation of its values".

I think something like that briefly explains the situation for context and provides the workaround. I'd favour "leaf fields" over "subfields" since I feel it could be confused with the other ES concept, "multi-fields". I'm not sure if we do this in our docs, but we could always link out to the [blog post](https://www.elastic.co/de/blog/discover-uses-fields-api-in-7-12) if necessary.

Author: That sounds so clear to me. Thanks! I'm adding the link to the blog post as well, it doesn't hurt.

+
If you're using sample data, data views are automatically created and are ready to use.
+
[role="screenshot"]
image::images/discover-data-view.png[How to set the {data-source} in Discover, width="40%"]

. If needed, adjust the <<set-time-filter,time range>>, for example by setting it to the *Last 7 days*.
+
The range selection is based on the default time field in your data.
If you are using the sample data, this value was set when you added the data.
If you are using your own data, and it does not have a time field, the range selection is not available.

**Discover** is populated with your data and you can view various areas with different information:

* All fields detected are listed in a dedicated panel.
* A chart allows you to visualize your data. 
* A table that shows all the data matching your data view.

> By default, the table includes a column for the time field and a column that lists all other fields in the document.

Author: Thanks, that's a nice nuance to add

You can modify the document table to display your fields of interest.

You can later filter the data that shows in the chart and in the table by specifying a query and changing the time range.

[float]
[[explore-fields-in-your-data]]
=== Explore the fields in your data

**Discover** provides utilities designed to help you make sense of your data:

. In the sidebar, check the available fields. It's very common to have hundreds of fields. Use the search at the top of that sidebar to look for specific terms in the field names.
+
In this example, we've entered `ma` in the search field to find the `manufacturer` field.
+
[role="screenshot"]
image:images/discover-sidebar-available-fields.png[Fields list that displays the top five search results, width=40%]
+

> TIP: You can use wildcards in field searches.  For example, `goe*dest` finds `geo.dest` and `geo.src.dest`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TIP: You can use wildcards in field searches.  For example, `geo*dest` finds `geo.dest` and `geo.src.dest`.
```

> 

Author: Nice, so we might as well remove that TIP, what do you think?

. Select a field to view its most frequent values.
+
**Discover** shows the top 10 values and the number of records used to calculate those values.

. Select the *Plus* icon to add fields to the results table.
You can also drag them from the list into the table.
+
[role="screenshot"]
image::images/discover-add-icon.png[How to add a field as a column in the table, width="50%"]
+

> When you add fields to the table, the **Summary** column that was summarizing each result's data is replaced.

Author: ```suggestion
When you add fields to the table, the **Summary** column is replaced.
```
I'd actually keep it simple to avoid making this sentence confusing or too complicated

. In the sidebar, select *Add a field*.

. Select the **Type** of the new field.

. **Name** the field. Name it in a way that corresponds to the way other fields of the data view are named.
You can set a custom label and description for the field to make it more recognizable in your data view. 

. Define the value that you want the field to show. By default, the field value is retrieved from the source data if it already contains a field with the same name. You can customize this with the following options:

** **Set value**: Define a script that will determine the value to show for the field. For more information on adding fields and Painless scripting language examples,
refer to <<runtime-fields, Explore your data with runtime fields>>.
** **Set format**: Set your preferred format for displaying the value. Changing the format can affect the value and prevent highlighting in Discover.

. In the advanced settings, you can adjust the field popularity to make it appear higher or lower in the fields list. By default, Discover orders fields from most selected to least selected.

. **Save** your new field.

You can now find it in the list of fields and add it to the table.

> In the following example, we're adding 2 fields: A simple "Hello world" field, and a second field that combines and transforms the `customer_first_name` and `customer_last_name` fields of the sample data into a single "customer" field. Options that are not mentioned are disabled:

Author: ```suggestion
In the following example, we're adding 2 fields: A simple "Hello world" field, and a second field that combines and transforms the `customer_first_name` and `customer_last_name` fields of the sample data into a single "customer" field:
```
It just meant that settings not specified in the example below aren't used or are left disabled. Maybe it's adding more confusion than clarity, I'll remove this part of the paragraph.

```

[float]
==== Visualize aggregated fields
If a field can be {ref}/search-aggregations.html[aggregated], you can quickly
visualize it in details by opening it in **Lens** from **Discover**. **Lens** is the default visualization editor in {kib}.

. In the list of fields, find an aggregated field. For example, with the sample data, you can look for `day_of_week`.
+
[role="screenshot"]
image:images/discover-day-of-week.png[Top values for the day_of_week field, plus Visualize button, width=50%]

. In the popup, click **Visualize**.
+
{kib} creates a **Lens** visualization best suited for this field.

. In **Lens**, from the *Available fields* list, drag and drop more fields to refine the visualization or create combinations. In this example, we're adding the `manufacturer.keyword` field onto the workspace.
+
[role="screenshot"]
image:images/discover-from-visualize.png[Visualization that opens from Discover based on your data]

. Save the visualization if you'd like to add it to a dashboard or keep it in the Visualize library for later use.

For geo point fields (image:images/geoip-icon.png[Geo point field icon, width=20px]),
if you click **Visualize**,
your data appears in a map.

> +

Author: Hmm yes that's some asciidoc syntax, I'll clean it up thanks you!

[role="screenshot"]
image:images/discover-maps.png[Map containing documents]

[float]
[[compare-documents-in-discover]]
==== Compare documents

You can compare multiple results or documents in details.

. Select the entries you want to compare from the Documents or Results tab in Discover.

. In the **Selected** dropdown at the top of the table, choose **Compare selected**. The comparison view opens and shows the selected entries next to each other.

> . Compare the values of each field. By default the first entry selected shows as the reference for displaying differences in the other entries. When the value remains the same for a given field, it's displayed in green. When the value differs, it's displayed in red.

Author: Oh I missed that option, I'll add it

. For a more complex search, try:
+
```ts
geoip.country_iso_code : US and products.taxless_price >= 75
```

[[filter-in-discover]]
Whereas the query defines the set of documents you are interested in,
filters enable you to zero in on subsets of those documents.
You can filter results to include or exclude specific fields, filter for a value in a range,
and more.

For example, exclude results from the ecommerce sample data view where day of week is not Wednesday:

. Click image:images/add-icon.png[Add icon] next to the query bar.
. In the *Add filter* pop-up, set the field to *day_of_week*, the operator to *is not*,
and the value to *Wednesday*.
+
[role="screenshot"]
image:images/discover-add-filter.png[Add filter dialog in Discover]

. Click **Add filter**.
. Continue your exploration by adding more filters.
. To remove a filter, click the close icon (x) next to its name in the filter bar.

[float]
==== Search and filter using ES|QL

You can use **Discover** with the Elasticsearch Query Language, ES|QL. When using ES|QL,
you don't have to select a data view. It's your query that determines the data to explore and display in Discover.

> You can switch to the ES|QL mode of Discover from the application top bar.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can switch to the ES|QL mode of Discover from the application menu bar.
```
I know internally we've been referring to this as the "app menu", but not sure if we have a standardized term for the docs. Do you know @ryankeairns?

Author: I think it works like that, I'll check for consistency with other apps/docs

Note that in ES|QL mode, the **Documents** tab is named **Results**.

Learn more about how to use ES|QL queries in <<try-esql, Using ES|QL>>.

[float]
[[save-discover-search]]
==== Save your search for later use

Save your search so you can use it later, generate a CSV report, or use it to create visualizations, dashboards, and Canvas workpads.
Saving a search saves the query text, filters,
and current view of *Discover*, including the columns selected in
the document table, the sort order, and the {data-source}.

> . In the toolbar, click **Save**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. In the application menu bar, click **Save**.
```

> . Give your search a title.

Reviewer 3: I wanted to add , mabe we should mention that users can add a description ... but it seems we just use the description in the saved dialog? :)

Author: ```suggestion
. Give your search a title and a description.
```

. Optionally store <<managing-tags,tags>> and the time range with the search.

. Click **Save**.

[float]
[[share-your-findings]]
==== Share your search

> To share your search and **Discover** view with a larger audience, click *Share* in the toolbar.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To share your search and **Discover** view with a larger audience, click *Share* in the application menu bar.
```

For detailed information about the sharing options, refer to <<reporting-getting-started,Reporting>>.

[float]
[[alert-from-Discover]]
=== Generate alerts

From *Discover*, you can create a rule to periodically
check when data goes above or below a certain threshold within a given time interval.

. Ensure that your data view,
query, and filters fetch the data for which you want an alert.

> . In the toolbar, click *Alerts > Create search threshold rule*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. In the application menu bar, click *Alerts > Create search threshold rule*.
```

=== Search and filter data

[float]
==== Default mode: Search and filter using KQL

One of the unique capabilities of **Discover** is the ability to combine
free text search with filtering based on structured data.
To search all fields, enter a simple string in the query bar.

[role="screenshot"]
image:images/discover-search-field.png[Search field in Discover]

To search particular fields and
build more complex queries, use the <<kuery-query,Kibana Query language>>.
As you type, KQL prompts you with the fields you can search and the operators
you can use to build a structured query.

For example, search the ecommerce sample data for documents where the country matches US:

. Enter `g`, and then select *geoip.country_iso_code*.
. Select *:* for equals, and *US* for the value, and then click the refresh button or press the Enter key.
. For a more complex search, try:
+
```ts
geoip.country_iso_code : US and products.taxless_price >= 75
```

[[filter-in-discover]]
Whereas the query defines the set of documents you are interested in,
filters enable you to zero in on subsets of those documents.
You can filter results to include or exclude specific fields, filter for a value in a range,

> and more.

Reviewer: The query bar allows to use KQL or Lucene language for filtering and the filters provide a "clickable" way to achieve mostly the same (plus a custom QueryDSL). With both ways user can include or exclude.

Author: I see, I didn't update that part from the previous version, but I agree it doesn't read well. I'll try to rephrase it to represent more accurately what you're describing. Let me know what you think, thanks!
```suggestion
With the query field, you can filter data using the KQL or Lucene languages. You can also use the **Add filter** function available next to the query field to build your filters manually or edit them as Query DSL.
```

Reviewer: > to build your filters manually or edit them as Query DSL

Or "to build your filters one by one or define them as Query DSL"

Reviewer: > With the query field

With the query input

Author: Applied 👍 thanks

[float]
[[alert-from-Discover]]
=== Generate alerts

From *Discover*, you can create a rule to periodically
check when data goes above or below a certain threshold within a given time interval.

. Ensure that your data view,
query, and filters fetch the data for which you want an alert.
. In the application menu bar, click *Alerts > Create search threshold rule*.
+
The *Create rule* form is pre-filled with the latest query sent to {es}.
. <<rule-type-es-query, Configure your query>> and <<action-types, select a connector type>>.

. Click *Save*.

For more about this and other rules provided in {alert-features}, go to <<alerting-getting-started>>.

[float]
=== What’s next?

* <<discover-search-for-relevance, Search for relevance>>.

* <<document-explorer, Configure the chart and document table>> to better meet your needs.

[float]
=== Troubleshooting

This section references common questions and issues encountered when using Discover.
Also check the following blog post: {blog-ref}troubleshooting-guide-common-issues-kibana-discover-load[Learn how to resolve common issues with Discover.]

**Some fields show as empty while they should not be, why is that?**

> This unexpected situation can happen with runtime fields and regular keyword fields when the string exceeds the value set for the {ref}/ignore-above.html[ignore_above] setting used when indexing the data into {es}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This could be the case with runtime fields and regular keyword fields when the string exceeds the value set for the {ref}/ignore-above.html[ignore_above] setting used when indexing the data into {es}.
```

It's expected from ES perspective. Not a bug.

Reviewer: Should we also mention another case we are aware of? If users have `nested` fields, values would be available only for the root field and empty for the "leaf" fields https://github.com/elastic/kibana/issues/190768

Author: If it helps users, yes we should :D Can we do this separately from this PR? Or would you be able to draft a quick explanation?

Author: ```suggestion
This can happen with runtime fields and regular keyword fields when the string exceeds the value set for the {ref}/ignore-above.html[ignore_above] setting used when indexing the data into {es}.
```
Just re-rewording the suggestion you made above. Thanks! (unexpected was from the user's perspective, but I guess we should not assume what they're thinking 😅)

Reviewer: Something like: "To see values of nested fields, add the field with `nested` type to the table instead of its sub fields."
